% CS444 Assignment 1
% Kevin Suwala, Kyle Verhoog
% $date$

# Scanning

File: [`src/main/scala/compiler/scanner/Scanner.scala`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/scala/compiler/scanner/Scanner.scala)

Our design goal with the scanner was to make it as generic and configurable as
possible. We opted to develop something similar to `lex`. So tokens can be
specified with regular expressions provided in a configuration file. The scanner
reads in this configuration and generates a DFA which can be used to scan source
files into the specified tokens.

## Implementation
The scanner works by generating or loading a DFA which specifies the tokens to
scan. The scanner then iterates over a given string with maximal-munch and scans
the longest matching strings using the DFA and produces a list of tokens to be
used by the parser.

The tokens are specified by a configuration file of the form


See file [`src/main/resources/tokens.lex`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/resources/tokens.lex).
```
<TOKEN1> "<REGEX1>"
<TOKEN2> "<REGEX2>"
...
<TOKENN> "<REGEXN>"
```

## DFA Construction

In order to construct the DFA used for scanning, we decided to write our own
regular expression library. The motivation for doing so was to gain familiarity
with developing a regular expression library as well as to make generating the
DFA for the scanner generic and configurable.

### Implementation

The DFA generation works by reading in the regular expressions, generating an
NFA for each and then combining the NFAs. The resulting NFA is then converted to
a DFA.


### Regular Expression Library

Defined in
[`src/main/scala/regex`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/scala/regex/Regex.scala),
the regex library was written from scratch.  Inspiration was taken from the
well-written articles from Russ Cox listed here:
[https://swtch.com/~rsc/regexp/](https://swtch.com/~rsc/regexp/). Our regex
library implements the following features:

- concatenation: `ab`
- union/alternation: `a|b`
- repetition zero-or-more: `a*`; one-or-more `a+`
- any character: `.`
- zero-or-one: `a?`
- ranges: `[a-z]`

#### Limitations
The regular expression language takes advantage of the fact that Joos source
files can only be expressed with the ASCII character set. We abuse unicode
characters heavily in our implementation to provide support for ASCII characters
like new-line, tab and others.


#### Problems
The primary problem we had with defining the Joos tokens with our regular
expression implementation was specifying multi-line tokens. This could easily
be done in most regular expression libraries that support _lazy_ matching with
the pattern `/\*.*?\*/`. We worked around this with a pretty dirty hack that
involved replacing the comment characters with a special unicode character and
then matching the special characters.

### Performance
The NFA combining is not very efficient and no optimizations are made to remove
unreachable states. It takes about a minute to generate the DFA for the Joos
language. An easy optimization would be to cut out unreachable states for each
regular expression NFA as they are added.

## Persisting the DFA
Because DFA generation takes a significant amount of time, we persist the
generated DFA and since the DFA does not change we simply read it in on program
start-up.

## Helpful Error Messages
Care was added so that if a scanning error were to occur, an exception is raised
containing useful debugging information like the line, column number and the
string scanned so far.

## Performance
Scanning performance is pretty good. With the maximal munch approach and DFA we
acheive linear scanning performance.

# Parsing

## Grammar
File [`src/main/resources/grammar.json`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/resources/grammar.json).
File [`src/main/resources/grammar.cfg`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/resources/grammar.cfg).

The grammar was based upon the grammar specified in the _Java Language
Specification_ version 1 text. We simply removed Java features not required
for Joos1W from our grammar. A JSON representation of the grammar was
constructed along with a Ruby helper script to convert the representation to a
format needed by the `Jlalr.java` utilities. This grammar turned out to be
LR(1).

## Algorithm
File [`src/main/scala/compiler/parser/Parser.scala`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/scala/compiler/parser/Parser.scala).

The parsing algorithm we use is LR(1). We used the provided helpers in
`Jlalr.java` to generate the parse table and then wrote the standard LR(1)
parsing algorithm.

## Weeding
Some basic weeding is done in the parser. This includes weeding on identifiers
for Java keywords that are not apart of the Joos1W language. Examples of these
are `try`, `catch`, `do` and `float`.

# Abstract Syntax Tree

File: [`src/main/scala/compiler/ast/AST.scala`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/scala/compiler/ast/AST.scala)

After parsing is completed, an Abstract Syntax Tree is generated from the parse
tree.

## Construction
The AST is constructed in one top-to-bottom traversal of the parse tree. The
nodes of the Abstract Syntax Tree inherit from the following base class:

```scala
class AST(var parent: Option[AST] = None,
          var leftChild: Option[AST] = None,
          var rightSibling: Option[AST] = None) { ... }
```

Nodes have access to their parent, their left-most child and the sibling to
their right. This was  influenced by the design of Abstract Syntax Trees as
described in _Crafting a Compiler_.


## Representation
The nodes of our Abstract Syntax Tree are classes that represent elements from
the grammar. We define classes with useful helper methods to represent language
constructs. For example the AST node for `MethodDeclaration` contains helper
functions like `modifiers()` for the modifiers of the method, `identifier()`
for the name of the method and `returnType()` for the method return type.
Instead of pulling this data up into the node when generating the AST, the
helper functions are AST lookup methods that provide syntactic sugar for
accessing child nodes. For example, with the aforementioned `identifier()`
method looks like this:

```scala
  def identifier: String = {
    this.getDescendant(2, Some(1)) match {
      case Some(n: MethodDeclarator) => n.identifier
      case e =>
        throw MalformedASTException(
          s"Method does not have MethodDeclarator child (got $e.")
    }
  }
```

## Weeding
Some weeding is performed during AST construction as the AST nodes
have some insight to their own structure. For instance, the
`MethodHeader` class will validate the modifiers that it has
ensuring rules like "an abstract method cannot be `static` or
`final`" are followed.


# Weeding

File [`src/main/scala/compiler/ast/Weeder.scala`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/scala/compiler/ast/Weeder.scala).

After the AST has been generated, a pass is made through the AST from
top-to-bottom performing any outstanding weeding. Here we check for things like

- filename matches class or interface name
- every class must contain at least one explicit constructor

and more.

# Bringing it all Together
All the pieces are combined in
[`src/main/scala/Compiler.scala`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/scala/compiler/Compiler.scala)
and
[`src/main/scala/Joos1WCompiler.scala`](https://git.uwaterloo.ca/kgsuwala/cs444-w19-vei/blob/79fd124aff5bcea44a63bc09e5b1841bea6105b4/src/main/scala/compiler/Compiler.scala).
Here is where the entry point `main` is defined. Essentially all it does is call:

```scala
Weeder.weed(AST.convertParseTree(Joos1WParser.parse(Joos1WScanner.scan(argv(1)))))
```
